<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>I</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="frontmatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="introduction-2" epub:type="introduction">
			<h2>A Note Upon the Bibliography of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">Malleus Maleficarum</i></h2>
			<p style="text-align: justify;">The Bibliography of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">>Malleus Maleficarum</i> is extremely intricate and difficult, as many of the earlier editions both folio and quarto are without place or date. Thus the British Museum possesses a copy (Press-Mark 1 B, 1606), folio, which in the catalogue stands as “1485?”, but this can hardly be correct. The British Museum has five editions of the fifteenth century: <abbr>4to</abbr>, 1490? (IA 8634); folio, 1490 (IB 8615); <abbr>4to</abbr>, 1494 (IA 7468); folio, 1494 (IB 5064); <abbr>4to</abbr>, 1496 (IA 7503).<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-97" id="noteref-97" epub:type="noteref">97</a></p>
			<p style="text-align: justify;">Graesse, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">Bibliotheca Magica</i>, Leipzig, 1843, gives the editions of the fifteenth century as Nuremberg, both <abbr>4to</abbr> and folio, 1494 and 1496. He also mentions an early folio and an early <abbr>4to</abbr> without date or place. He further records a <abbr>4to</abbr> published at Cologne in 1489, and a folio published at Cologne, 1494.</p>
			<p style="text-align: justify;"><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">Malleus Maleficarum</i>, <abbr>8vo</abbr>, Paris, an edition to which the British Museum catalogue assigns the date of “1510?”.</p>
			<p style="text-align: justify;"><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">Malleus Maleficarum</i>, <abbr>8vo</abbr>, “Colonie. <i xml:lang="la">Per me Henricü de Nussia</i>,” 1511.</p>
			<p style="text-align: justify;"><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">Malleus Maleficarum</i>, <abbr>8vo</abbr>, Coloniae, J. Gymnicus, 1520. (Copies of these two Cologne editions are in the British Museum.)</p>
			<p style="text-align: justify;"><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">Malleus Maleficarum</i>⁠ ⁠… <i xml:lang="la">per F. Raffaelum Maffeum Venetum et <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">D.</abbr> Jacobi a Judeca instituti Seruorum summo studio illustratis et a multis erroribus vindicatus⁠ ⁠… Venetiis Ad Candentis Salamandrae insigne.</i> <abbr>MD</abbr>. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">LXXVI</span>, <abbr>8vo</abbr>. (This is a disappointing reprint, and it is difficult to see in what consisted the editorial care of the Servite Raffaelo Maffei, who may or may not have been some relation of the famous humanist of the same name (<abbr>d.</abbr> 25 January, 1522), and who was of the monastery of San Giacomo della Guidecca. He might have produced a critical edition of the greatest value, but as it is there are no glosses, there is no excursus, and the text is poor. For example, in a very difficult passage, <i xml:lang="la">Principalis Quaestio <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, Pars <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span></i>, where the earliest texts read “<i xml:lang="la">die dominico sotularia iuuenum fungia⁠ ⁠… perungunt</i>,” Venice, 1576, has “<i xml:lang="la">die dominica sotularia iuuenum fungia⁠ ⁠… perungent</i>.”)</p>
			<p style="text-align: justify;"><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">Malleus Maleficarum</i>, <i xml:lang="la">Impressum Francofurti as Moenum apud Nicolaum Bassaeum</i>⁠ ⁠… <abbr>8vo</abbr>, 1580.</p>
			<p style="text-align: justify;"><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">Malleus Maleficarum</i>,⁠ ⁠… Francofurti⁠ ⁠… apud Nicolaum Bassaeum⁠ ⁠… <abbr>8vo</abbr>, 1582.</p>
			<p style="text-align: justify;"><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">Malleus Maleficarum</i>,⁠ ⁠… <i xml:lang="la">Francofurti⁠ ⁠… apud Nicolaum Bassaeum</i>, 2 <abbr>vols.</abbr>, <abbr>8bo</abbr>, 1588. This edition also contains in <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> extracts from Nider’s <i epub:name="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">Formicarius</i>. <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, which is dedicated to John Mündzenberg, Prior of the Carmelite House at Frankfort, contains the following nine Tractates:</p>
			<p style="text-align: justify;">Bernard Basin, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">De artibus magicis</i>. (1482.)</p>
			<p style="text-align: justify;">Ulrich Molitor, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">De lamiis</i>. (1489.)</p>
			<p style="text-align: justify;">Girolamo Menghi, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism z3998:name-title">O.S.F.C.</abbr>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">Flagellum Daemonum</i>. (1578.)</p>
			<p style="text-align: justify;">John Gerson, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">De probatione Spirituum</i>. (circa 1404.)</p>
			<p style="text-align: justify;">Thomas Murner, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">O.M.</abbr>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">De Pythonico contractu</i>. (1499.)</p>
			<p style="text-align: justify;">Felix Hemmerlin, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">De exorcismis</i>. (circa 1445.)</p>
			<p style="text-align: justify;"><i xml:lang="la">Eiusdem</i>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">De credulitate Daemonibus adhibenda</i>. (1454.)</p>
			<p style="text-align: justify;">Bartolomeo Spina, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title z3998:initialism">O.P.</abbr>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">De strigibus</i>. (1523.)</p>
			<p style="text-align: justify;"><i xml:lang="la">Eiusdem</i>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">Apologiae <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span> aduersus <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">Ioann. Franc.</abbr> Ponzinibum</i>. (1525.)</p>
			<p style="text-align: justify;">The title-page announces that these works are “<i xml:lang="la">Omnes de integro nunc demum in ordinem congestos, notis &amp; explicationibus illustratos, atque ab innumeris quibus ad nauseam usque scatebant mendis in usum communem uindicatos.</i>” It is true that the earlier editions did swarm with errors, and some of these blemishes have been duly corrected, but there still remains much to be done in the way of emendation. It is to be wished that even the little care given to <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> had been bestowed on the text of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">Malleus Maleficarum</i> in <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, for this is very poor and faulty.</p>
			<p style="text-align: justify;"><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">Malleus Maleficarum</i>, Lyons, <abbr>8vo</abbr>, 1595. (Graesse.)</p>
			<p style="text-align: justify;"><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">Malleus Maleficarum</i>, Friburg, 1598.</p>
			<p style="text-align: justify;"><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">Malleus Maleficarum</i>, Lyons, <abbr>8vo</abbr>, 1600.</p>
			<p style="text-align: justify;"><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">Malleus Maleficarum</i>, Lyons, “<i xml:lang="la">multo auctior</i>,” <abbr>8vo</abbr>, 1620.</p>
			<p style="text-align: justify;"><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">Malleus Maleficarum</i>, Friburg, <abbr>8vo</abbr>, 1660.</p>
			<p style="text-align: justify;"><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">Malleus Maleficarum</i>, <abbr>4to</abbr>, Lyons, 1666. (Graesse.)</p>
			<p style="text-align: justify;"><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">Malleus Maleficarum</i>, 4 <abbr>vols.</abbr>, “<i xml:lang="la">sumptibus Claudii Bourgeat</i>,” <abbr>4to</abbr>, Lyons, 1669. This would appear to be the latest edition of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">Malleus Maleficarum</i>, and the test has here and there received some revision. For example, in the passage to which reference has already been made, <i xml:lang="la">Principalis Quaestio <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, Pars <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span></i>, where the former reading was “<i xml:lang="la">sotularia iuuenum fungia⁠ ⁠… perungent</i>,” we have the correct “<i xml:lang="la">axungia</i>”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-98" id="noteref-98" epub:type="noteref">98</a> instead of “<i xml:lang="la">fungia</i>.” I have given in the Introduction a list of the collections contained in these four noble volumes.</p>
			<p style="text-align: justify;">Quétif-Echard, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">Scriptores Ordinis Praedicatorum</i>, 2 <abbr>vols.</abbr>, Paris, 1719, <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 881, mention a French translation of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">Malleus Maleficarum</i>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Le Maillet des Sorcières</i>, as having been published, quarto, at Lyons by Stephanus Gueynard. No date, however, is given, and as this book cannot be traced, it seems highly probable that one of the many Lyons reprints of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">Malleus Maleficarum</i> was mistakenly supposed to be a French rendering of the original. In answer to my inquiries <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> le Directeur of the Bibliothèque Nationale has kindly informed me: “<i xml:lang="fr">L’ouvrage de Sprenger, Le Maillet des Sorcières, édition de Lyon, ne se trouve point à la Bibliothèque Nationale. Mais, de plus, je me suis reporté à l’excellente bibliographie lyonnaise de Baudrier, XIª série, 1914, et là non plus, l’édition de Stephanus Gueynard ne se trouve point.</i>” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Le Maillet des Sorcières</i>, <abbr>4to</abbr>, Lyons, by Stephanus Gueynard, does not occur in the valuable <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Essai d“une Bibliographis Franéaise mèthodique et raisonnée de la Sorcellerie</i> of <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Yve-Plessis, Paris, 1900.</p>
			<p style="text-align: justify;">There is a modern German translation of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">Malleus Maleficarum</i> by <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. W. R.</abbr> Schmidt, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Der Hexenhammer</i>, 3 <abbr>vols.</abbr>, Berlin, 1906; second edition, 1922⁠–⁠3.</p>
			<p style="text-align: justify;">In 1912 Oswald Weigel, the famous “Antiquariat &amp; Auktions-Institut” of Leipzig, sold an exceptionally fine, if not⁠—should it be once permissable to use a much over-looked word⁠—a unique collection of books dealing with witchcraft. This library contained no fewer than twenty-nine exemplars of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">Malleus Maleficarum</i>, of which the dates were catalogues as follows: (1) Argentorati (Strasburg), <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Prüss, <abbr>ca.</abbr> 1487. (2) Spirae, Peter Drach, <abbr>ca.</abbr> 1487. (3) Spirae, Peter Drach, <abbr>ca.</abbr> 1490; or Basle, <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> von Amorbach, <abbr>ca.</abbr> 1490?. (4) No place nor date. With inscription “<i xml:lang="la">Codex moasterij scti Martini prope Treuirum.</i>” (5) Küln, <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Koelhoff, 1494. (6) Nürnberg, Anton Koberger, 1494. (7) Nürnberg, Anton Koberger, 1496. (8) [Paris], Jehan Petit, <abbr>ca.</abbr> 1497. (9) Cüln, Henricus de Nussia, 1511. (10) [Paris, Jehan Petit, no date.] (11) Lyon, <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Marion, 1519. (12) Nürnberg, Frederick Peypus, 1519. (13) Küln, <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Gymnicus, 1520. (14) Venetiis, <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">Io.</abbr> Antonius Bertanus, 1574. (15) Ventiis, ibid., 1576. (16) Francofurti, apud Nicolaum Bassaeum, 1580. (17) Francofurti, ibid., 1582. (18) Lugduni, <i xml:lang="la">apud Ioannam Iacobi Iuntae, 2 tomi</i>, 1584. In this edition the title is misprinted <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">Malleus Maleficorum</i>. (19) Francofurti, <i xml:lang="la">Sumptibus Nicolai Bassaei</i>, 1588. (20) Duplicate of 19. (21) Lugduni, Petri Landry, 2 <i xml:lang="la">tomi</i>, 1595. (22) Francofurti, Sumptibus Nicolai Bassaei, 2 <i xml:lang="la">tomi</i>, 1600. (23) Lugduni, Sumptibus Petry Landry, 3 <i xml:lang="la">tomi</i>, 1604. (24) Lugduni, ibid., 1614. (25) Lugduni, ibid., 1615. (26) Lugduni, Sumptibus Clavdii Landry, 3 <i xml:lang="la">tomi</i>, 1620. (27) Lugduni, 3 <i xml:lang="la">tomi</i>, 1620⁠–⁠21. (26) Lugduni, <i xml:lang="la">Sumptibus Clavdii Landry, 3 tomi</i>, 1620. (27) Lugduni, 3 <i xml:lang="la">tomi</i>, 1620⁠–⁠21. (28) Lugduni, 4 <i xml:lang="la">tomi</i>, 1669. (29) The modern German translation of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">Malleus Maleficarum</i> by <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. W. R.</abbr> Schmidt, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Der Hexenhammer</i>, 3 <abbr>vols.</abbr>, Berlin, 1906.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
